# Google's Data Collection for Project Nightingale Draws Ethical Concerns
Since 2018, Google and Ascension, America's second-largest health system, have been secretly partnering on “Project Nightingale", a new software development project for improving Ascension’s healthcare services.  However, Ascension has been transferring massive amounts of patients’ health records to Google without informing patients and doctors. Although Google's project is compliant with federal laws, there have been many ethical concerns about the project’s data collection. The following two articles I will discuss have opposing views on this topic.

## Article 1
In WSJ's [Google’s ‘Project Nightingale’ Gathers Personal Health Data on Millions of Americans](https://www.wsj.com/articles/google-s-secret-project-nightingale-gathers-personal-health-data-on-millions-of-americans-11573496790), one major issue that the article raises about this project is that at least 150 Google employees have access to tens of millions of patients’ medical records, while neither patients nor doctors have been informed about these records being shared with Google for the project. While Google’s action does not violate federal law, patients will lose trust in their healthcare providers. Patients would not be too happy to learn that their trusted hospitals are secretly transferring their health data to large technology companies without their consent. Although Google claims that patients’ health records will be protected, the data that Google collected also included patients' names and dates of birth. Ascension did not even anonymize patients’ personal information to protect their privacy before transferring them to Google for research and software development. Better methods of protection could have been implemented to ensure patients’ identities are kept confidential from people outside of Ascension’s network.
	
In addition, the article points out that other than advancing healthcare for the benefit of patients, there is actually a strong financial motive for Google to partner with Ascension on this project even though Google has employed many engineers to work on “Project Nightingale so far without charging Ascension for their work” because Google plans “to use the framework to sell similar projects to other health systems.” This project also helps Google expand its Google Cloud business and gain a strong foothold in the healthcare industry while competing against other large technology companies. This raises more concerns and debates about whether Google should be allowed to make a profit using patients’ data without their permission.


## Article 2
In contrast to WSJ’s view of “Project Nightingale," the author of the second article [Google and Ascension: big win or big worry for patients?](https://healthcaretransformers.com/digital-health/current-trends/project-nightingale/) believes that having access to vast amounts of personal health data will further research and development of new medicines, as well as advance personalized care, and streamline healthcare services.  Google’s computing power and advanced artificial intelligence can fully utilize the large quantity of medical data to develop a product that can help healthcare providers, such as Ascension, “deliver more advanced and individualized patient care.”  Through the partnership of a healthcare system and a technology giant, Project Nightingale can potentially transform the medical field. 
	
However, these benefits may come at a cost. For example, Project Nightingale has raised many questions by the public, such as whether it is legal or ethical for Google to use the data without patients’ consent for the project. However, the author reminds us that even though Ascension provided Google with patients’ data without first notifying the patients, “the data Ascension collects from its own patients are done with full transparency – patients know they are giving this information.” The question is really who owns the data or has the authority to allow others to access these data. The author does emphasize that measures to protect these personal data must be taken first before allowing such large amounts of data to be transferred from healthcare providers to tech companies. More transparency about how the data will be used for technology is also needed so that patients will be more willing to provide their data to companies for research. As long as these actions are implemented, partnerships such as Project Nightingale can help create healthcare products that will benefit everyone. 



